Add explanations (#32)
canonical/ubuntu-packaging-guide: docs/explanation/archive.rst

Ubuntu Package Archive
======================

:term:`Linux` :term:`Distributions <Distribution>` like :term:`Ubuntu` use :ref:`Repositories`
to hold :term:`Packages <Package>` you can install on target machines. :term:`Ubuntu`
has several :ref:`Repositories` that anyone can access. The *Ubuntu Package Archive* 
hosts :term:`Debian` :term:`Binary Packages <Binary Package>` (``.deb`` files) and
:term:`Source Packages <Source Package>` (``.dsc`` files). On :term:`Ubuntu` installations,

> the *Ubuntu Package Archive* is configured as the default source for the :term:`APT`

Reviewer: Should "APT package manager" be defined as a single term rather than two?

Author: I think here is a greater discussion that I would like for you and @keirthana to decide. 
When does it make sense to reference a term? I initially wanted a Wikipedia style page where a term is referenced, every time it occurs, but I agree that this can be hard to read.

Reviewer: Wikipedia only tends to reference the first appearance of a term, I think :thinking: 
I'd tend to overlook a second reference if it occurred further down the page (especially if the page is long or if it makes sense that readers might want to remind themselves of the meaning at that point) since Wikipedia sometimes also does this, but it should be the exception rather than the rule.

Author: Resolved with 6cbf3120a572322bf619fd3c28f2f6d4075b21ba

are not updated (not even for security-related fixes).

.. _ArchivePockets_Security:

security
~~~~~~~~

This *pocket* contains security-related updates to :term:`Packages <Package>` in the
:ref:`ArchivePockets_Release` *pocket*.

.. _ArchivePockets_Updates:

updates
~~~~~~~

This *pocket* contains non-security-related updates to :term:`Packages <Package>` in the
:ref:`ArchivePockets_Release` *pocket*.

.. _ArchivePockets_Proposed:

proposed
~~~~~~~~

This *pocket* is a :term:`Staging Environment` the :term:`Ubuntu` community can
opt in to verify the stability of any updates before they get deployed to a broader
range of consumers.

| After the initial release of an :term:`Ubuntu` :ref:`ArchiveSeries`, this
  *pocket* contains non-security-related updates to :term:`Packages <Package>`
  in the :ref:`ArchivePockets_Release` *pocket* before they get uploaded to the
  :ref:`ArchivePockets_Updates` *pocket*.
| Before the initial release of an :term:`Ubuntu` :ref:`ArchiveSeries`, this
  *pocket* contains non-security-related updates to :term:`Packages <Package>`
  in the :ref:`ArchivePockets_Release` *pocket* before they get uploaded to the

>   :ref:`ArchivePockets_Release` *pocket*.

Reviewer: Suggest re-ordering to before-then-after, and changing to bullet points since the pipe doesn't seem to do anything in terms of rendering in RTD. 

Also just want to clarify, because it's a bit confusing. With regard to the "before" point, you have referred twice to the release pocket - is that intentional? (the other has release + updates)

Author: The reordering is fine. I started with after, because this is the more common situation. An LTS series has a lifespan of up to 10 years and Interim series of up to to nine months, but they are just in development for 6 months.

Author: The pipes actually ensures that these 2 paragraphs start on their own line without having a gap between them.

So rather than 
```
After <content>. Before <content>.
```

or

```
After <content>.

Before <content>.
```

we get 

```
After <content>.
Before <content>.
```

, but bullet points are probably okay.

+---------------------+----------------------+---------------------------------+
| ``jammy``           | ``jammy``            | :ref:`ArchivePockets_Release`   |
+---------------------+----------------------+---------------------------------+
| ``jammy-security``  | ``jammy``            | :ref:`ArchivePockets_Security`  |
+---------------------+----------------------+---------------------------------+
| ``jammy-updates``   | ``jammy``            | :ref:`ArchivePockets_Updates`   |
+---------------------+----------------------+---------------------------------+
| ``jammy-proposed``  | ``jammy``            | :ref:`ArchivePockets_Proposed`  |
+---------------------+----------------------+---------------------------------+
| ``jammy-backports`` | ``jammy``            | :ref:`ArchivePockets_Backports` |
+---------------------+----------------------+---------------------------------+

You can see all active suites here: http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu/dists/

.. note::

    The ``devel`` :ref:`ArchiveSeries` allways mirrors the :ref:`ArchiveSeries` with
    the :term:`Codename` of the :term:`Current Release in Development`.

.. _ArchiveComponents:

Components
----------

> *Components* are logical subdivisions or namespaces of the :term:`Packages <Package>`

Reviewer: Do we have a definition for "namespaces"?

Author: namespaces is used here as an abstract concept rather than a concrete technical reference Many programmers know namespaces from their programming languages like C++/C# or Java/Python/JS/TS modules.

Do you think this should have a glossary entry?

Reviewer: Hmmm...maybe? If it's a common term that anyone getting involved in packaging should already know, then possibly not. I'll leave it to your judgement.

Author: Resolved with e23ad4092120f6d5ff3f0c61b6769ca1dd845016, I added a term definition for namespaces

in a :ref:`ArchiveSuite`. The :term:`APT` :term:`Package Manager` can individually
subscribe to the *components* of a :ref:`ArchiveSuite`.

The :term:`Packages <Package>` of an :term:`Ubuntu` :ref:`ArchiveSeries` are categorized

> if they are :term:`Open Source Software` and part of the Base :term:`Packages <Package>`

Reviewer: It seems like we maybe want to define "base packages"

Author: The components section was one of the harder sections to write. "base packages" was the term used here: https://ubuntu.com/about/release-cycle

There is not really a good definition. It's basically just the packages that Canonical decided to support, because they are fundamental for Ubuntu.

Reviewer: I think adding that should actually be enough to make it clear, i.e. "base packages, which are fundamental for Ubuntu". The reason I don't like "base" is because it has multiple potential meanings and so has the potential to be ambiguous if we haven't defined it, but adding the "fundamental" part sort of removes that ambiguity (imo).

Author: Resolved with eba8fc32ad870061b15e2174da97f7c800ea1ea9, I added a term definition

`here <https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/+archivemirrors>`_.

.. note::

    There also exist mirrors for the Ubuntu :term:`ISO` images (also called *"CD images"*,
    because :term:`ISO` images which can be downloaded and burned to a CD to make
    installation disks.)

    You can find a complete list of officially recognized *Ubuntu CD Mirrors*
    `here <https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/+cdmirrors>`_.
    

Country Mirrors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*Ubuntu Package Archive Mirrors* that provide a very reliable service in a country
can request to be the official *Country Mirror* for that country. :term:`Ubuntu`
installations are configured by default to use the *Country Mirror* for their selected country.

*Country Mirrors* are accessible via the domain name format:
  
.. code:: text

    <country-code>.archive.ubuntu.com

You can see which mirror is the *Country Mirror* by doing a simple :term:`DNS` lookup. For example:

.. tab-set::

    .. tab-item:: Finland (FI)

        .. code:: bash

            dig fi.archive.ubuntu.com +noall +answer

        .. code:: text

            fi.archive.ubuntu.com.	332	IN	CNAME	mirrors.nic.funet.fi.
            mirrors.nic.funet.fi.	332	IN	A	193.166.3.5

>         Therefore ``mirrors.nic.funet.fi`` is finlands *Country Mirror*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Therefore, ``mirrors.nic.funet.fi`` is Finland's country mirror.
```

    .. tab-item:: Tunisia (TN)

>         Tunisia does not have any third-party mirrors in its country. Therefore the
>         Tunisia *Country Mirror* is just the main *Ubuntu Package Archive* server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Tunisia does not have any third-party mirrors in its country. Therefore the
        Tunisia country mirror is just the main Ubuntu package archive server
```

>         Tunisia *Country Mirror* is just the main *Ubuntu Package Archive* server

Reviewer: I'd avoid use of the word "main" here to avoid new readers getting confused with the previous discussion of the *main* repository. Primary might work instead?

Author: Good catch!

Author: Resolved with 735ff5c17bc525e16db7cbbb1dbe5fd0d884596a

        (``archive.ubuntu.com``).

        .. code:: bash

            dig tn.archive.ubuntu.com +noall +answer

        .. code:: text

            tn.archive.ubuntu.com.	60	IN	A	185.125.190.36
            tn.archive.ubuntu.com.	60	IN	A	91.189.91.83
            tn.archive.ubuntu.com.	60	IN	A	91.189.91.82
            tn.archive.ubuntu.com.	60	IN	A	185.125.190.39
            tn.archive.ubuntu.com.	60	IN	A	91.189.91.81

        which are just the ``archive.ubuntu.com`` IP addresses:

        .. code:: bash

            dig archive.ubuntu.com +noall +answer

        .. code:: text

            archive.ubuntu.com.	1	IN	A	185.125.190.39
            archive.ubuntu.com.	1	IN	A	185.125.190.36
            archive.ubuntu.com.	1	IN	A	91.189.91.83
            archive.ubuntu.com.	1	IN	A	91.189.91.81
            archive.ubuntu.com.	1	IN	A	91.189.91.82

> Package Uploads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Package uploads
```

---------------

> :term:`Ubuntu` encourages contributions from any person in the wider community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ubuntu encourages contributions from any person in the wider community.
```

> However, direct uploading to the *Ubuntu Package Archive* is restricted. These

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, direct uploading to the Ubuntu package archive is restricted. These
```

general contributions need to be reviewed and uploaded by a :term:`Sponsor`.

> See the article :doc:`/explanation/sponsoring` that explains this process in more detail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See our :doc:`article on sponsoring <sponsoring>` that explains this process in more detail.
```

Resources
---------

> - `Ubuntu Release Cycle <https://ubuntu.com/about/release-cycle>`_
> - `Ubuntu Blog -- Ubuntu updates, releases and repositories explained <https://ubuntu.com/blog/ubuntu-updates-releases-and-repositories-explained>`_
> - `Ubuntu Server Docs -- Package Management <https://ubuntu.com/server/docs/package-management>`_
> - `Ubuntu Wiki -- Mirrors <https://wiki.ubuntu.com/Mirrors>`_
> 
> - `Ubuntu Help -- Repositories <https://help.ubuntu.com/community/Repositories>`_
> - `Ubuntu Help -- Repositories/Ubuntu <https://help.ubuntu.com/community/Repositories/Ubuntu>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Ubuntu release cycle <https://ubuntu.com/about/release-cycle>`_
- `Ubuntu blog -- Ubuntu updates, releases and repositories explained <https://ubuntu.com/blog/ubuntu-updates-releases-and-repositories-explained>`_
- `Ubuntu Server docs -- package management <https://ubuntu.com/server/docs/package-management>`_
- `Ubuntu Wiki -- Mirrors <https://wiki.ubuntu.com/Mirrors>`_

- `Ubuntu Help -- Repositories <https://help.ubuntu.com/community/Repositories>`_
- `Ubuntu Help -- Repositories/Ubuntu <https://help.ubuntu.com/community/Repositories/Ubuntu>`_
```

> Landscape Repositories

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Landscape repositories
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Landscape is a management and administration tool for :term:`Ubuntu`.
> See more information `here <https://ubuntu.com/landscape>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Landscape <https://ubuntu.com/landscape>`_ is a management and administration tool for Ubuntu.
```

> Landscape allows you to mirror :term:`APT` :ref:`Repositories` like the
> *Ubuntu Package Archive*. Although it is not directly related to the
> *Ubuntu Package Archive* it can be educational to understand how
> :term:`APT` :ref:`Repositories` work in general.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Landscape allows you to mirror APT repositories like the
Ubuntu package archive. Although it is not directly related to the
Ubuntu package archive, it can be educational to understand how
APT repositories work in general.
```
